[DOCS-5738] Tutorial - Enabling Tracing for a Java Application with the Admission Controller (#18846)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/guide/tutorial-enable-java-admission-controller.md

  tags: Blog
  text: Use library injection to auto-instrument and trace your Kubernetes applications with Datadog APM
---

## Overview

This tutorial walks you through the steps to enable tracing for Java Application using the Datadog Admission Controller.

For other scenarios, such as the application and Agent on a host, see the other [Enabling Tracing tutorials][1].

See [Tracing Java Applications][2] for general comprehensive tracing setup documentation for Java.

### Prerequisites

- A Datadog account and [organization API key][3]
- Git
- Docker
- Curl
- Kubernetes v1.14+

## Install the sample application

To demonstrate how to instrument your app with the Datadog Admission Controller, this tutorial uses a Java app built with Spring. [Here][4] you can find the code.

To get started, clone the repository:

{{< code-block lang="shell" >}}
git clone https://github.com/DataDog/springblog.git
{{< /code-block >}}

The repository contains a multi-service Java application pre-configured to be run within Docker and Kubernetes. The sample app is a basic Spring app using REST.

## Start and exercise the sample application 

> 1. Switch to to the `/k8s` directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Switch to to the `/k8s` subdirectory in the springblog repo:
```

    ```

    The service is started and listens on port 8080. It exposes an `/upstream` endpoint. 

4. Check that communication takes place by running the following curl command:
   {{< code-block lang="shell" >}}
curl localhost:8080/upstream
Quote{type='success', values=Values{id=6, quote='Alea jacta est'}}{{< /code-block >}}

5. Stop the application so you can enable tracing on it:
   {{< code-block lang="shell" >}}
cd springblog/k8s/
kubectl delete -f ./depl-with-lib-inj.yaml{{< /code-block >}}

## Instrument your app with Datadog Admission Controller

After you have your application working, instrument it using the Datadog Admission Controller. In containerized environments, the process is generally:

1. Install the [Datadog Cluster Agent][5].
2. Add [Unified Service Tags][6] in pod definition.
3. [Annotate][7] your pod for library injection.
4. [Label][8] your pod to instruct the Datadog Admission controller to mutate the pod.

There's no need to add the tracing library because it's automatically injected. You also don't need to add Datadog variables and deploy a new image or version of your app. This section of the tutorial steps you through this process.

> 1. Install the Datadog Cluster Agent using [this YAML config file](link) and the following command, specifying your own [Datadog API key](/account_management/api-app-keys/):
>    {{< code-block lang="shell" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. From the `k8s` subdirectory, use the following command to install the Datadog Cluster Agent, specifying the `values-with-lib-inj.yaml` config file and your [Datadog API key](/account_management/api-app-keys/):
   {{< code-block lang="shell" >}}
```

    This annotation specifies the latest version of the Java tracing library. You can also reference a specific version of the library, such as `"v1.5.0"`.

    The final pod definition should look like the excerpt below. See also the full [YAML file][10] in the sample repo. The instructions you added to instrument the app are highlighted:

    {{< highlight yaml "hl_lines=6-8 24-28" >}}
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    metadata:
    name: springfront
    labels:
        tags.datadoghq.com/env: "dev"
        tags.datadoghq.com/service: "springfront"
        tags.datadoghq.com/version: "12"
    spec:
    replicas: 1
    selector:
        matchLabels:
        name: springfront
    minReadySeconds: 15
    strategy:
        type: RollingUpdate
        rollingUpdate:
        maxUnavailable: 1
        maxSurge: 1
    template:
        metadata:
        labels:
            name: springfront
            tags.datadoghq.com/env: "dev"
            tags.datadoghq.com/service: "springfront"
            tags.datadoghq.com/version: "12"
        annotations:
            admission.datadoghq.com/java-lib.version: "latest"

>     {{< /highlight >}}

Reviewer: Love the highlighting - super cool

    Normal  Pulling    25s   kubelet            Pulling image "pejese/springfront:v2"
    Normal  Pulled     2s    kubelet            Successfully pulled image "pejese/springfront:v2" in 22.158699094s
    Normal  Created    2s    kubelet            Created container springfront
    Normal  Started    2s    kubelet            Started container springfront
    ```

    As you can see, an init-container is added to your pod. This container includes the Datadog Java tracing libraries to a volume mount. Also `JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS` is modified to include `javaagent`. And Datadog-specific environment variables are added to the container:

    ```
    Environment:
    DD_ENV:              dev
    DD_VERSION:          12
    DD_SERVICE:          springfront
    DD_ENTITY_ID:         (v1:metadata.uid)
    DD_TRACE_AGENT_URL:  unix:///var/run/datadog/apm.socket
    URL:                 http://springback:8088
    JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS:    -javaagent:/datadog-lib/dd-java-agent.jar
    Mounts:
    /datadog-lib from datadog-auto-instrumentation (rw)
    /var/run/datadog from datadog (rw)
    /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount from kube-api-access-qvmtk (ro)
    ```

> 8. Verify that the Datadog tracing library is injected into the pod by checking the pod logs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Verify that the Datadog tracing library is injected into the pod by checking the pod logs. For example::
```
I suspect the pod name is randomized, so just calling out that this is an example

   {{< code-block lang="shell" >}}
kubectl logs -f springfront-797b78d6db-jqjdl{{< /code-block >}}

    You should see something like this:

    ```
    Defaulted container "springfront" out of: springfront, datadog-lib-java-init (init)
    Picked up JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS:  -javaagent:/datadog-lib/dd-java-agent.jar
    ```

## View APM traces in Datadog

> 1. Exercise the app running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run the following command:
```

   {{< code-block lang="shell" >}}
curl localhost:8080/upstream{{< /code-block >}}

2. Open the Datadog UI and see the two services reporting under the [Service Catalog][11]:
   {{< img src="tracing/guide/tutorials/tutorial-admission-controller-service-catalog.png" alt="Springback and springfront services in the Service Catalog." style="width:100%;" >}}

> 3. Explore Traces and see the associated Service Map as well:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Explore Traces and see the associated Service Map:
```
